# cap
Cattle Breed Classification Using Vision Transformer with Two-Phase Fine-Tuning


Breed detection of cattle is a crucial task for modern farm management, precision dairying, and insurance schemes. Though previous research efforts show that standard CNN models can achieve success in detecting cattle breed, the lack of understanding about modeling long range spatial relationships between fine grained phenotypic features becomes a barrier for better breed detection. This study proposes a strong classification framework based on ViT-Base/16 pre-trained on ImageNet-21k dataset. In order to make the framework perform optimally with 1,332 images in the primary dataset, we designed a well-crafted two-phase approach for fine-tuning our model.
In the first phase, only the head part of the ViT was fine-tuned with the fixed transformer backbone, which aimed at stabilizing the representation from vision transformers. In the second phase, the last six transformer blocks along with the head were fine-tuned simultaneously with the lower learning rate (5e-5). To increase the robustness of our model, we adopted an intensive data augmentation pipeline including flip, rotation, color jitter, and random erasing to simulate the environment occlusion effect. Finally, the model reached 89.51% validation accuracy with macro-F1 score of 0.88. Compared with the baseline models (ResNet-50 and EfficientNet-B0), Vision Transformers have proved to be a more effective architecture for fine-grained classification tasks.
